# Prerequisites

The behavioral and instance layers of the `zitilib` models assume a number of prerequisites to function correctly.

This guide assumes that you're running `fablab` from a Linux (or Unix-like) environment. `fablab` is currently incubating support for execution from Windows hosts, but configuring that is beyond the scope of this guide. We'll include Windows-specific instructions in a future release.

Please make sure that your Linux environment includes a working `rsync` implementation:

```
$ rsync
rsync  version 3.1.3  protocol version 31
Copyright (C) 1996-2018 by Andrew Tridgell, Wayne Davison, and others.
Web site: http://rsync.samba.org/
Capabilities:
    64-bit files, 64-bit inums, 64-bit timestamps, 64-bit long ints,
    socketpairs, hardlinks, symlinks, IPv6, batchfiles, inplace,
    append, ACLs, xattrs, iconv, symtimes, prealloc
```

If you do not have an `rsync` binary, install it using your operating system's package management system.

## Ziti

You will need [Ziti](https://ziti.dev/) binaries, possibly two different sets, depending on the type of operating system you are running `fablab` on.  These sets are:

- a build of [Ziti](https://ziti.dev/) that is compatible with the linux environment expressed by the models (Ubuntu 20.04 LTS). 
- a build of [Ziti](https://ziti.dev/) that is compatible with the operating system you are running `fablab` from (i.e. Mac, Windows, or Linux).


You can find a current build of Ziti at the following location:

https://netfoundry.jfrog.io/netfoundry/ziti-release/ziti-all/

Extract the Ziti binaries for the operating system you are running `fablab` from into a folder somewhere on your filesystem. Wherever you'd like to locate your binaries should contain a `bin/` sub-folder. For example, you might want to put the binaries in `~/local/ziti/bin`.

Once you've extracted the binaries, you'll need to `export` a `ZITI_ROOT` environment variable that points ot the parent folder containing the Ziti `bin/` sub-folder. For example, if you extracted the binaries into `~/local/ziti/bin`, you should set:

```
$ export ZITI_ROOT=~/local/ziti
```

It is recommended that you also include `ZITI_ROOT/bin` in your `PATH`:

```
$ export PATH=$ZITI_ROOT/bin:$PATH
```

When `fablab` executes, it will exec certain Ziti cmds (e.g. to generate a PKI) so the above setup is necessary to enable `fablab` to successfully locate the Ziti components.

If you are running `fablab` from a Linux system, you may skip the rest of this section and continue with Terraform setup.

If you are running `fablab` from a Mac or Windows system, you should now extract the Ziti binaries for the Linux operating system into a folder somewhere on your filesystem. Just like the above, wherever you'd like to locate your binaries should contain a `bin/` sub-folder. 
For example, you might want to put the binaries in `~/local/ziti-linux/bin`.

Once you've extracted the binaries, you'll need to `export` a `ZITI_DIST_ROOT` environment variable that points to the parent folder containing the Ziti `bin/` sub-folder. For example, if you extracted the Linux binaries into `~/local/ziti-linux/bin`, you should set:

```
$ export ZITI_DIST_ROOT=~/local/ziti-linux
```


_If you add these environment variables to your `~/.bashrc` or other shell startup file, you can easily open multiple shells to interact with your `fablab` models._

## Terraform

The `zitilib` models all use `terraform` to express their infrastructure. You'll need to have a working `terraform` binary in your path in order to work with these models.

```
NOTE: fablab requires terraform version 0.12 or newer. It will not operate correctly with terraform version 0.11 or older.
```

You can find more information about obtaining a working `terraform` build at the `terraform` website:

https://www.terraform.io/

Please make sure that the `terraform` binary is in your shell's `PATH`. If your shell is configured correctly, you should see something like the following:

```
$ terraform version
Terraform v0.12.21
```

## Building fablab

Clone a copy of [`fablab`](https://github.com/openziti/fablab) into your usual location for cloned repositories. In these instructions, I've cloned `fablab` into `~/Repos/nf/fablab`.

`fablab` requires that a `FABLAB_ROOT` environment variable is set that points to the location of your cloned repository:

```
$ export FABLAB_ROOT=~/Repos/nf/fablab
```

Install a copy of `golang`:

https://golang.org/dl/

I typically install `golang` as `~/local/go`.

Make sure `go` is in your `PATH`.

```
$ export PATH=~/local/go/bin:$PATH
```

You're going to need to set a `GOPATH` environment variable in order to build `fablab`. `GOPATH` points to the path where the `go` build will download all of the dependencies required to build `fablab`, and will also contain the resulting `fablab` binary in the `$GOPATH/bin` folder.

I typically use `~/local/fablab` as my `GOPATH` for `fablab`. I also add `$GOPATH/bin` to my `PATH`, to make `fablab` as convenient to use as possible:

```
$ export GOPATH=~/local/fablab
$ export PATH=$GOPATH/bin:$PATH
```

_You might consider adding these environment variables to your `~/.bashrc` or other shell startup document, so you can easily open new shells for working with `fablab`._

With all of that configured, you build `fablab` like this:

```
$ cd $FABLAB_ROOT
$ go install ./...
```

As `go` builds `fablab` you will see a number of messages as it downloads the required dependencies:

```
$ go install ./...
go: downloading github.com/oliveagle/jsonpath v0.0.0-20180606110733-2e52cf6e6852
go: downloading github.com/netfoundry/ziti-foundation v0.0.0-20191204161457-1913130f80f6
go: downloading github.com/netfoundry/ziti-fabric v0.0.0-20191204194843-932014abd752
go: downloading github.com/jinzhu/copier v0.0.0-20190924061706-b57f9002281a
go: downloading github.com/sirupsen/logrus v1.4.2
go: downloading github.com/michaelquigley/pfxlog v0.0.0-20190813191113-2be43bd0dccc
...
```

When complete, you will end up with a `fablab` binary:

```
$ file $GOPATH/bin/fablab
/home/michael/local/fablab/bin/fablab: ELF 64-bit LSB executable, x86-64, version 1 (SYSV), dynamically linked, interpreter /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2, for GNU/Linux 3.2.0, Go BuildID=52VVTRbvR32rMeLxB1Sn/3AGXicQ7r99FIzpmOyPX/9_24bAooenKN2V_23vXi/C_spqtKvdMcSv8LlJq-y, BuildID[sha1]=f4d47f853b55f7da62edcc456e490a070ac329f3, not stripped
```

And if your `PATH` is configured correctly:

```
$ fablab
The Fabulous Laboratory

Usage:
  fablab [command]

Available Commands:
  activate    activate a model
  build       build the configuration for the model
  clean       remove instance data from empty or disposed models
  create      create a fablab instance from a model
  dispose     dispose of all model resources
  dump        dump the resolved model structure
  exec        execute an action
  export      export the instance data to a zip archive
  express     express the infrastructure for the model
  help        Help about any command
  kit         kit the distribution for the model
  list        list objects
  run         operate a model
  ssh         establish an ssh connection to the model
  status      show the environment and active instance status
  sync        synchronize a run kit onto the network
  up          progress through lifecycle runlevels (express -> build -> kit -> sync -> activate)
  use         use an instance (becomes active instance)
  version     display fablab version information

Flags:
  -h, --help      help for fablab
  -v, --verbose   enable verbose logging

Use "fablab [command] --help" for more information about a command.
```

## AWS Access

You'll need AWS credentials with privileges for creating VPCs, instances, and associated network components that are necessary to launch an environment on AWS. Make sure you've got your access and secret keys ready, as we'll configure them into your environment in a later step.

The models that we'll work with in this guide do not require anything other than the ability to create VPCs and instances. There are no other AWS resource types that are used by these models.

## SSH Key in AWS

You're going to want to have a named SSH key installed into each region where you plan to site resources. The `zitilib/examples/tiny` model uses the `us-east-1` region by default, so you'll at least need your named SSH key installed in that region.

The larger `zitilib/examples/smartrouting` model creates hosts in multiple regions (`us-east-1`, `us-east-2`, `us-west-1`, and `us-west-2`). If you choose to instantiate and express that model, you'll need to make sure that you've got the same SSH key installed in those regions as well.

You're going to need to be running an `ssh-agent`, and that agent should have your SSH key loaded into it.

```
$ ssh-add ~/.ssh/nf-fablab-mquigley
$ ssh-add -l
3072 SHA256:Z7tIUW0tNpieeQCBNEm/DLFutTsR/5rCRtZKaViE01k michael@zero-lx.quigley.com (RSA)
```

The `ssh-add -l` command should show the key that you've loaded. If this is not functioning, `fablab` will not work.

## \~/.fablab/bindings.yml

Once you've got all of the above configured, you're ready to create your `~/.fablab/bindings.yml` file. The `bindings.yml` file is your "user preferences" for working with `fablab` models, and we'll configure the necessary settings required to work with the `zitilib` instances.

`~/.fablab/bindings.yml` is a YAML file, and looks like this:

```
environment:      "new_fablab_user"
credentials:
  aws:
    access_key:   "..."
    secret_key:   "..."
    ssh_key_name: "mquigley"
  ssh:
    key_path:     "/home/michael/.ssh/nf-fablab-michael"
    username:     "ubuntu"
```

You'll want to set `environment` to a unique name for your instances and objects in AWS. This is effectively the "name" that is tagged onto the objects created for `fablab` instances from your environment.

Replace the `...` in `access_key` and `secret_key` with your AWS key details. 

Replace `mquigley` with the name of the SSH key that you configured into your AWS account in the "SSH Key in AWS" step above. 

Replace `key_path` with the path to your private key file for the SSH key you configured into AWS.

## Ready

With these prerequisites configured, you should be ready to create and express your first `fablab` model.

Proceed to [Creating an Instance](02.creating.an.instance.md).